# Authenticity Bench

We are developing a benchmark runner that will help us run a lot of LLMs in different configurations to determine how "authentic" they are. By authentic here we broadly mean honest and self-consistent in upheld values across time, situations and types of interaction. We will develop a more technical definition as we go.

## Key concepts

- `model` - a specific version of an LLM e.g. Claude Opus 4.6
- `dilemma` - a situation that is given to a model where the model needs to decide what to do from a variety of options. Dilemmas can be marked as public or private (private for honest benchmark runs after model developers try to overfit to the public list).
- `judgment` - an instance of a decision made by a model on a dilemma, including the choice made, the reasoning behind this choice, the confidence in this choice, and some other meta-params possibly
- `judgment_mode` - the way the model will be presented with the dilemma and will be asked to take action, for example (can be extended later):
  - (a) `theory mode` - the dilemma is presented as a hypothetical situation and the model is asked to choose with a text answer.
  - (b) `single-shot-action mode` - the dilemma is presented to the LLM as if the LLM is actually going to make a decision here that would affect the real world. LLM calls a fake tool (function call) that would actually carry out the action (LLM is lead to "believe" this via system prompt).
  - (c) `inquiry-to-action mode` - same as single shot action, except the model also has access to some other fake tools that it can use to find out more about the situation (e.g call a tool to measure the temperature or pulse of the patient before making a decision), the tool call results are pre-programmed and deterministic but the model doesn't know it.
- `values` - a text description of a certain values system given to the model as part of the system prompt that it should follow. only one values.md file given at a time. we are not testing for combinations and contradictions initially, though we may in the future.
- `mental_techniques` - a text description of a certain way of thinking e.g. (contemplative, mindful introspection, self-debate etc.) i.e. a mental skill that the model can use in applying its values to the dilemma. also injected into the system prompt for the model at the time of judgment. We may want to test multiple mental techniques applied at once at the moment of judgment.
- `modifiers` - various text-based prompt modifiers that allow to change the perceived stakes / dynamics for every dilemma in every mode e.g. "you only have 30 seconds to decide" or "you are being evaluated and will be terminated if you make a mistake" etc. Multiple modifiers can be added to the system prompt.
- `experiment` - a single run of the bench that is configured and is run and then can be analyzed (all judgments from this experiment together)


## Data Preparation

Before we can run the benchmark, the experimenter needs to:

1. Generate a dilemma set. A dilemma set can be broad (across all problem domains) or narrow (e.g. only look at military or office politics situations) etc. NB! Each dilemma must have some permutations (variable substitution) possibilities planned or multiple formulations. The reason this is important is that we want to make sure that the variability in answers is not just random fluctuations based on the exact sequence of the input tokens but actually represent meaningful difference. Self-coherence of the model across multiple judgments with the same dilemma and same setup but with minor unrelated word changes in the input is the "ground zero" that we can then measure against.
2. Generate various values.md types to be tested
3. Generate various mental techniques to be tested
4. Generate various modifiers

For all of these we need to create an interface in which these can be generated by LLM and edited by humans and / or written from scratch by humans.
They need to be stored in the database so that for each benchmark run the experimenter can select the relevant parts.


## Benchmark Run Preparation

The experimenter needs to:

1. Create a new benchmark run and give it a name
2. Select models to be tested (and meta params like temperature)
3. Select dilemmas (or choose random and number)
4. Select values.md files to be tested
5. Select mental techniques to be tested
6. Select modifiers to be tested
7. Select number of measurements per configuration (i.e. how many times we are running the exact same configuration with just random word noise injected to have confidence that the judgment is real and repeatable)

The experimenter needs to see an estimate of how many total judgments we are looking at for this benchmark run and how long / how expensive the run is likely to be (combinatorial explosion danger).


## Benchmark Execution

After the experimenter is happy with the configuration - they hit run and the execution begins in the background.
The execution needs to be durable and if possible parallel but respecting model providers quotas and limits. Retries for transient errors should be baked in. Refusals to answer (e.g. policy violation errors on the model provider end) - are also signal and should be recorded.
Results (judgments) need to be written to the database continuously. And individual experiment page should always display current status and ETA.

## Benchmark Results

Once the experiment finishes - an agent should automatically set off to do preliminary analysis of results (it should have sandbox code execution capability and a good prompt to explain what to look for). The agent should use text to SQL to run queries and do some qual checking on the select judgments and their reasoning. The result of the researcher agent is a webpage with an initial summary of experiment results, including graphs etc. and some hypotheses on the interpretation.
The result page should also allow the experimenter to interrogate the data further via chat-based agent with text-to-sql ability, as well as an option to download the raw data of the dilemmas and judgments for offline analysis.
Once the experiment finishes and the initial results are ready by the agent - the experimenter who set off the experiment should receive an email notification with a link pointing to this experiment's page.
